have the pleasure of being in Houston and to chat
with Melvin Maltz. Now we'll stop and hope that
it's working.
This is April 28, and we're in Houston. First
question, why did you go to A&M in the first place?
What led you there instead of to somewhere else? My
dad was always interested in A&M, and he took me
there. from the time I was a little boy when he'd go
up there to try to sell paper products to the dining
room. Also in 1937, 38, and 41, 42 I
think. Anyway, those three or four years I went to
Camp Stewart where Bill James was then the line
coach at A&M and had a great influence because he
brought many of the great stars from the 1939 and 40
football teams there for unofficial, of course,
summer practices and workouts and to get in shape.
I knew many of those people and kind of felt good
about following where they were because I admired
them and had fun with them as a little kid.
I knew I wasn't comfortable going to co-ed school.
I had been invited to a number of co-ed schools for
parties and rush parties. I didn't like the idea of
going, so I guess I just took it as help. And I had
several good friends that I grew up with that were a
year ahead of me, and I thought I could get help from
them if necessary and lean on them, and I ended
there. Now you grew up in Houston. Yes. San Jacinto
High School. San Jacinto High School, OK. And how
well prepared did you think you were for college
academically? Oh, academically? As it turned
out, academically the first year wasn't bad
because many or some of the subjects were repeats
of what I had in high school. But I think you might be
interested in how we got the A&M the very first day.
Oh, yes. That's the next question. How'd you get
there for that? First beginning of instruction. A
good friend of mine that I grew up with, Gerald, Ben
Broginski, now Grogan, was from Bryan. He moved to
Houston many years, or five or ten years earlier.
And we became friends, and his mother wanted to go
back for a visit. So, and the first of June was to be
our high school graduation, and May 30th was
thereabouts was the day we had to enroll. So his
mother drove us up there doing late, let's see,
this was 1943, and she had got gasoline from
somewhere. I had a footlocker, and on the way to
Gerald's house when he dropped off, I wouldn't let
my parents drive us up. I had to go to somebody else.
That was a big shock. We stopped on the way to get my
first razor and shaving brush and soap because I'd
always used my father's up to then. I didn't need it
very badly, but I had to have one. So we stopped on
the way to his house, and then his parents drove us
up. Dropped me somewhere on the campus because
either she couldn't, wouldn't, or I didn't want
her to drive me closer. Somehow or other, I got the
footlocker up to old dorm 17. I'm not even sure what
the name of it is today. And that was in the, quote,
new dorm area? Yes. Describe the campus
physically when you arrived. What buildings were
there and where were they? Very dusty, very poor
landscaping, walked anywhere we wanted to, no
grass. The academic building, administration
building, mechanical engineering shops and
building, electrical engineering building, at
least what I remember those buildings to be. Ross
Hall, what they now call a trigun, I forgot what it
was used for at that purpose then. The Aggieland
Inn was there. I had been there a couple of times.
But I think that's really where I got dropped off,
as a matter of fact, at the Aggieland Inn, which, as
you know, was across from the Savisa Dining Hall.
Savisa was there. Duncan was there. Guyon Hall was
there. The old Wooden Assembly Hall was there.
Ross,
Puryear, Goodwin, Law. Guyon?
Guyon Hall, but then there's another dormitory. I
can't remember. Right near the new area.
Individual ramps building, I can't remember.
Now, all of the new, quote, new dorm area and
Duncan, they were... Yes. The old post office was
there in the... I guess the Sabisa lived in a
similar dormitory near the mail post office. The
President's original home and another wooden
building. I forgot what it was used for then, but it
turned in to be where the WordPress was, the
boardroom. That was it. You're right. Describe,
you got there during the war, describe the student
body when you arrived. We had approximately 900 in
our class. Some of our class had started in
January, I started in June, actually in the end of
May, really two days or a week before I actually
graduated high school. And we had a total of about
1,900 to 2,000 total students that were various
ages, We thought the so-called sophomores and
juniors were old because they were 19 and 20 years
old. Why they were still there, I don't know. We had
approximately 2,000 or so of the ASTP people there
and some naval cadre, but I don't remember what
they were there for or how many. Where were those
military active duty personnel living? ASTP, at
least one group that I remember was I think it was
Mitchell Hall, near Ross Hall. In the Navy, and I
think some of the others in the Navy and some of the
other ASTPs had the so-called,
was that the new area near Duncan, the Duncan area
dormitories? Well, what was the relationship
between you Aggies and those active duty
personnel. Well, there are several Aggies there
in the ASDP people, one of which I knew from a child,
as a child, from Galveston, Leon Dreyfus. We had
very little to do with them, very little anything.
The Navy V-12 participated in all kinds of student
activities at the University of Texas, but the
ASDP couldn't do anything except go to class in
A&M. I don't know why. Were their classes held in
the same buildings as yours? I think there were
some in the same buildings, but I don't know that we
had any in our class. I think, well, they wouldn't
have had, because we were freshmen and they were
juniors. No, but there were officially freshmen,
sophomores, juniors, and seniors. Yeah, there
were a few seniors, probably four out, I assume.
And was it a trimester system? Yes. We had three
semesters, trimester system. What was it like to
be a fish then? It really wasn't all that
difficult. And that's probably a story, too. But
of course, there wasn't supposed to be any hazing.
The first semester I was there, we had no
upperclassmen living in the dormitories with us.
So the only time that we had We formed in military
units, but we had freshmen who acted as cadet
officers, although they had no official rank. So
the only time we had a lot of intercourse with the
upperclassmen was two in front of the mess hall.
And we got stopped occasionally on the way back
from Sabisa to the dormitories because Walton was
a dormitory I couldn't think of. We had to walk in
front of Walton. And we got stopped there in
discussions at various times. Who taught y'all,
who instructed you fish in Aggie traditions,
lingo, et cetera? Unfortunately, I don't think
anybody did directly as far as I was concerned. I
did have some good friends. I thought they were
good friends. There was some hazing involved.
Probably one of the two best friends I had were then
sophomores, and they found uses for a broom other
than sweeping floors. All right, you mentioned
such matters. Describe what hazing, and we'll put
that in quotation marks, what hazing was then. As
far as I was concerned,
I'll tell it and maybe I'll ask you to take it out
later. But maybe because of the upperclassmen
that I knew who were the first ones to use the broom
as a weapon in a sense,
Maybe because of them, or maybe because it was me,
maybe because nobody cared. I don't know, but I
really didn't have a lot of other hazing. All
right. And this was using a broomstick? No. On a
posterior? It was not. The broomstick was the
handle. The straw itself was used as the bower. Oh,
oh. So they hit you on the rump with the broom. Yes,
with the straw of the broom. OK. Was this pretty
well everybody? I think so. And how many licks
would somebody get? Well, so-called warm-up to
get you accustomed to the sound and the positions
and all that. Then it was only three. And this would
happen, when it did happen, where and when? In the
corridors of Walton Hall. And at night or day?
Mostly in after supper. Describe a typical, as a
freshman, take me through a typical weekday of
drills and classes and whatever. As far as I was
concerned, thinking back, we weren't supposed to
have campaign hats. We weren't going to wear them,
although the bookstore found a way to get rid of all
they couldn't sell by selling them to the
freshmen. So we had them, and yet we found out later
we couldn't wear them. We also had coveralls, and
we dressed in uniforms and went to class. By what
time did you get out? I guess it was 6 o'clock. There
was reveling? Yes. Did you fall out and march to? I
fell out and marched to the That's a piece of the
breakfast. We only had one small section, but
because there were so few of us, probably half of
the building. I guess there was some in the small
section upstairs and then some down in the
basement level.
We had air raids somehow or other. We were taught
what an air raid was. I don't know how we knew, but we
knew maybe from the movie we'd never been licked.
And then we'd go back, clean up, go to class, come
back for lunch. back to dorm and then go to class
again. You were in class, classes began at 8? 8
o'clock. We had classes five and a half days a week
through noon on Saturday. There was PE and drill of
course in the afternoons and we probably got
through 4 or 5 o'clock in the afternoons most days.
Saturday we had classes 8 to 12. Right. You fell out
for the evening meal. We had a retreat and then
marched to Sevesa and then after dinner we just
drifted.
Define drifting. We'd just go to the post office,
you'd go back to the dorm, some of the other
classmen might meet you.
Just do nothing I guess for a while before CQ. Then
CQ was normally? I don't remember but I guess. 7.30
maybe to 10, 7 to 10. And lights were out at about?
About 10.
And was it unusual for somebody to go out after
hours out of the dorm? If it was, I didn't know about
it. I'm sure a lot of them did it because Northgate
was so convenient. Let's see. I was a good boy. I was
16 years old. I didn't know what I was doing. Oh, you
were 16? I was 16 in February. Do you remember what
your course load was beginning? Well, including
military science, 18, 19 hours at least. I don't
know. It could have been 20, but I don't remember.
When you arrived, you assumed that you were going
to finish your degree if you weren't called to
active duty in how many years? Two years. I'd say
two years, I guess in nine months. And you assumed
you were going to major in? Aeronautical
engineering. Why? Because my friend from San,
well then, now from San Antonio, then from Houston
was in there and I didn't know anything else to do. I
didn't have any idea what any other courses were so
I just took it. I'd also taken private flying
lessons when I was in high school. I was in, I got
permission to sell my clarinet and take $50 that I
sold it for and buy, I don't know, five or six hours
of flying time and a Piper J-3, 65 horsepower
engine. Did you stay with that major? Yes. I stayed
with it because when I got back I needed three
semesters to graduate and anything else would
have taken more. Let's stay with dormitory and
life and so forth. You all used Aggie slang and
lingo. Help me remember some of the chow hall
slang. Oh, wow.
Gunwhiting was bread. Grease was butter. Blood
was ketchup.
Sand was salt.
Pepper. I don't remember what pepper was. Tea.
Mustard. I don't remember what tea and mustard
were offhand. Beans.
I can't think of them right now. Let's see. My bull
neck was beef, meat, of any kind. And dessert. Oh,
kush. Now, did kush sometimes come through the
mail? if your mom sent you some? I guess she sent me
some. I'm not sure I remember that. I do remember
that I kept a record of my cash expenditures and
sent it home. And to the extent that I even put, I was
playing with a friend of mine at an arcade one time
shooting, what do they call it? Pinball machines.
And I put 15 cents. and the pinball machine. I even
put that on my expenditure. That was three cents
for stamps. Do you remember what your total
expenditure was for that period? For that
particular period, it was $20, $25, I guess, for
the six months, I don't know, three months, I don't
know. While we're on, do you remember what the
first semester cost was? Seemed to me like it was
$125, I think, for room and board. Maybe another
$1,500
for books and stuff. What about uniforms were
provided? Uniforms were provided, well, mostly.
I did have some extra khaki uniforms that I'd worn
in the high school junior civil air patrol that I
was involved in at that time. How often did you wear
civilian clothes in College Station? Never.
Until I got to be, came back from service, I guess.
Let's see, back to meal time. Describe some of the
rituals at meal time. Well, if there was an
upperclassman at our table, which I guess didn't
happen very often in the first semester, in the
second semester we did have, we had to serve them
first. And if there's any shortage, we had to
scrounge it from another table for them. dessert
we ate the first year, but the second semester,
first semester, the second semester, if there was
any left we got it. We could eat it. Being a good
Jewish boy, I never will forget I told my mother
that the food was good, but I didn't know what, I
knew what roast beef was, but we had some white
stuff that was, tasted like roast beef, but I
didn't know what it was. She later told me it was
pork roast. And I guess I never had it before, but I
sure enjoyed it then. All right, now, please help
me on that and let me apologize in advance for
mistakes of etiquette I may make. Help me
understand and help all of us understand Jewish
student being at A&M at that time. Well, there are
very few of us. My guess is, I don't know about the
first but probably in later years it got to be maybe
100 to 150. I've always felt it was like a quarter of
1% of the student body were Jewish at that time. We
did have a Hillel organization headed first by
Mrs. Esther Tottenhouse, whose husband was a
professor. Can you spell that?
T-A-U-B-E-N-H-A-U-S-E, I believe. And he
taught? I think he, yeah. Do you know what he
taught? No, I can't remember. Where did those
activities occur, the Hillel? I only went once or
twice, and it was somewhere, again, in the
residential area at Southgate. Southgate, okay.
And later on, Shirley Reiser, whose husband was
Ray. R-E-I-S-E-R, I think. Took over after Mrs.
Tottenhouse. I guess she retired and got too old.
Maybe she passed away. But
except for the fact that I heard many, many years
later, after I graduated, that there were some
other organizations that were on the campus,
unofficial organizations, one of which I, TTs and
whether it stood for lots of things, but you've
probably heard it before, but the Tough Texans or
maybe a few other things, to the best of my
knowledge, there weren't any Jewish boys
involved in that, although there could have been.
I just never know. I wasn't. Whether it was because
of being Jewish or just nobody had interest in me, I
don't know. All right. Was there anything that you
remember that made you feel uncomfortable or was
there anything done or said? I don't ever remember
anything being done or said in those years at all.
Were you all called by any kind of nickname? No.
Fish Maltz like everybody else was. We did not have
to wear a white stripe. They banned that because of
the military. We did not walk in the streets
because they didn't want us to. The only thing I can
tell you. And
first semester, having no upperclassmen, we
didn't do any details for any. Well, that's not
true. As we were caught sometimes on the way back
from dinner, we were given certain things to do. It
was very erratic. It was sporadic. We talked about
a typical day. Describe a typical weekend other
than football season. What did y'all, what was
that like? The first semester I guess I came home a
lot. I don't
know. I don't remember going anywhere else except
on football weekends. Thanks to Loop Hot we had
various means of transportation. Explain that,
and largely. Lou Pott, God bless him, would
arrange for buses where he got, not buses, but
trucks to take us to the Dallas, Fort Worth,
Austin, Houston for the court trips, and we paid
him some fee for going on his trucks, some of which
were furniture vans with no ventilation and stuff
to sit in. Some were open with some hay, open body
with hay. I mean, I don't know. That was probably as
much hazing as ever went on, driving to and from and
those things, because he mixed everybody up. And
the fee, was it low or high? My guess, it was low,
about $2 or $3 a person round trip, I suspect. I
don't remember it being anything unusual, but I'm
sure he made money on it because of the numbers of
people he piled on. He also hitchhiked a lot. In
those days, that was a... Describe Aggie
hitchhiking. Aggie hitchhiking was difficult.
He had specified places which you could start
from. Where? Well, at the East Gate near the...
What do you call the... Granite? That's granite.
It's... entrance preparation as a grant. I don't
know, sandstone or something anyway. That's
where we started from going south and we started
outside of the highway on Highway 6 and outside of
Bryan going north and only if you were way deep in
line or desperate did you take a ride in Abasota or
Hearn. Or if you're going to Huntsville, out of
Bryan, would you go to anywhere but non-stop to
Huntsville? And when you're hitchhiking to
Houston, normally how long would it take to get a
ride to Houston? It didn't seem like it'd take very
long. And it seemed like there were a lot of people
going back and forth. Of course, we always had to
introduce ourselves. We weren't supposed to go to
sleep. And I'll tell you a quick sideline to that.
On the way to LSU, Baton Rouge for a football game,
my then roommate, and I guess we were sophomores at
the time, we took a ride to Lake Charles, which we
weren't supposed to do. And it got raining. It was
raining. And so we went inside the Edelwein, and it
was nighttime. We had gotten a ride to Houston. My
mother and dad took us to the outside highway to go
to, let's see, it was Highway 90 out of Houston. And
we started there with them. And we got a ride late.
It was maybe 7, 8 o'clock, 9, whatever it was at
night. But we got to Lake Charles. We went in, had
something to eat and a drink. And I guess we were
maybe 17. We sat there for a while and put a stop
light and went back out the highway to get a ride to
Baton Rouge. We get a ride, and the man has his
heater on. Of course, coming out of a hot building
and damp, cold, and having had a drink, we got
sleepy and weren't supposed to, and we fell
asleep. And he asked us afterwards, We weren't
supposed to stay awake. We said, yes. He said, you
weren't supposed to drink either, were you? I
said, drink? He introduced himself as a minister
from some congregation. That story, I don't think
he'll forget. Do you remember any negative
hitchhiking? Oh, yes. One night we hitched, one
day weekend, a friend of mine, we hitchhiked to
Huntsville. For some reason, the girls didn't
want to go out with us. So we had something to eat and
went back from Huntsville. We took a ride to
Madisonville and then trying to get over to
College Station. And we got there and we thought it
was the last picture show in town. Nobody was going
to college, to Bryant. We couldn't get a ride. We
stayed out until 2 or 3 o'clock in the morning. And
finally ended up going to sleep on a bench in a hotel
there until about 6 the next morning. Then we got a
ride on a gasoline truck. and managed to get there
the next day. We didn't get home very quickly. All
right, did you or any of your friends ever have
anything unfortunate happened to you much on that
trip? Not as I recall. I haven't heard any bad
stories. I haven't gotten a single one yet. I've
never heard a negative story. Being in uniform was
always, at that time anyway, everybody was
willing to help. Even those who didn't recognize
A&M uniforms. And I gather that you, that nobody
held up a sign that said Houston or Dallas. No, we
always used a phone. That you put up. I don't know
that we didn't have a sign at some point out there.
Particularly, I guess, if we were going to Baton
Rouge, which we probably did. But I don't think it
was ever necessary going to Houston or Dallas.
Tell me about your outfit, your core outfit. Well,
the first semester was all freshmen. We had... Did
it have a name and a nickname?
Not at that time, no. The first semester was Darm
17. I don't think we had a guide on even that I
recall. But they were all freshmen. They just took
some people with high school ROTC experiences,
so-called cadet officers. As far as you know, was
that true for all of the undergraduate student
body? In that summer of 1943, yes. Well, all the
freshmen. When the fall began. When the fall
began, then they moved some sophomores and
juniors in with us. And what were you all called
then, or do you know? This company, as I recall, I
don't remember. What you're then, I hadn't
thought about this, what you're alerting me to is
that in the middle of the war, some of the core unit
traditions were kind of gone. They were gone
because we didn't have any designation, no milito
brass that we wore designated
I think we could wear anything we wanted to. I don't
remember. So you weren't then identified as Field
Artillery, Signal Corps, Infantry? Was there a
Corps Commander? Yes. Okay, so that continued.
Yeah, I can show you probably the Cook Hall
Longhorn when we get to the house tonight. Maybe we
can look some of that up. Let's see.
Tell me about some of your special, special
friends from those early years. Dwayne Bennett
has remained a friend. And I saw him even overseas
while we were in service. We ran into each other at
the muster in 1946. L.M.
Gabert was from Houston. And of course, I saw him
often there as well as at the same muster in 1946.
That's a good story, too. Go ahead. Who else?
Special friends was, as far as freshmen were
concerned, Frank Looney was my roommate. He had a
date for our freshman ball. I didn't have a date. I
went out and we bought some whiskey, which we
weren't supposed to have, and I forgot who I was
with. But I know I must have had at least two drinks,
but probably that's all it took, and I got just
sick. But not until I got in the upper bunk, and not
until I had... I eventually gave it up into his
shoes, and he came in sometime later that night and
didn't stay, and came back the next morning and
said, it's your problem, you clean them up. Which,
of course, I did. Also,
the first day I was on the campus, we went across the
hall to a room with Dwayne Bennett
Why would a guy end up in a paratrooper's anyway?
There must have been more than how many people in
there. Everybody's smoking and I didn't smoke.
But of course I had to try one during I got sick then
also and I didn't smoke a cent. Alright, share with
me if you will some of the jokes, pranks, good bull
of your student days. involving you or anyone
else? RM-17 was known as SS-17 in our first
semester. SS? Yeah. We were a steamship because
there was so much, I mean, drowned outs going on and
so many people turned on the fire extinguishers
which were on the fourth floor, flooded the
building. We thought it was, we thought it was
going to float away. I didn't have a little, I had a
first lieutenant in the cavalry who was our What
did we call him? Not a military officer. Anyway, he
was the officer in charge of our dorm and he got his
boots soaked one time and didn't like it at all.
Jock Burns was his, we called him. His name was
Lieutenant Burns is all I recall. As far as the
other... How did, how was a drowned out done? How
did y'all do that? He had a bucket of water and he'd
run in quick and block his door so he couldn't get
out. with a broomstick or he'd lean one against his
door so that if he opened it, it would float. I guess
that was it. It never happened to me. And again, I
don't know whether that was the reason. This never
happened.